# Intro to JavaScript

- Download this repository and unzip the folder.
- Open the folder in VS Code.
- Although JavaScript runs in a web browser. Some features of JavaScript will only work if the web page is on a web server. The easiest way to do this VS Code is to install the 'Live Server' extension.
  - In VS Code, on the right-hand side menu click on extensions (it looks like some blocks with one separated from the others)
  - Search for 'live server' and install it.
  - Once it's installed, in the bottom right of VS Code click on 'Go Live' to launch the server. This will tell you a port number e.g. 5500
  - In a web browser enter localhost and the port number e.g. http://localhost:5500/ to view your page.
- The app should have some basic functionality.
  - The user can select a decade and the list of films updates to show films from that decade.

## Making Sense of the Code

Here are some key points about how the app is working

- At the moment the data for the app is stored in two arrays `filmsFrom2000s` and `filmsFrom2010s` at the top of the page.

  - Insides _app.js_, have a good look at the structure of these arrays, note that each film is stored as a JavaScript object.

- Look in the HTML. There are two hyperlinks

```html
<div id="decadeNavHolder">
  <a href="#" onclick="changeDecade(2000)">2000</a>
  <a href="#" onclick="changeDecade(2010)">2010</a>
</div>
```

- When clicked the buttons call the function `changeDecade()` passing a decade as an argument.
- Have a look in _app.js_ for the function `changeDecade()`.
  - An `if` statement uses this value to call further functions `updateFilmsHeading()` and `updateFilmList()`

```javascript
function changeDecade(decade) {
  if (decade === 2000) {
    updateFilmsHeading(decade);
    updateFilmList(filmsFrom2000s);
  } else if (decade === 2010) {
    updateFilmsHeading(decade);
    updateFilmList(filmsFrom2010s);
  }
}
```

`updateFilmsHeading()` simply gets hold of the _H1_ element from the page and changes its content to show which decade has been selected.

```javascript
function updateFilmsHeading(decade) {
  // get hold of the HTML element with an id of filmsHeading
  const filmsHeading = document.querySelector("#filmsHeading");
  //change the content of this element e.g. <h1>2010s</h1>
  filmsHeading.innerHTML = "Films from the " + decade + "s";
}
```

The `updateFilmList()` function is similar, however changing the content of the element is a bit more complex.

- Instead of simply changing the text we need to insert a hyperlink for each film in an array.
- Have a good look through this function. The comments explain what each line is doing.
- In a browser 'right-click' on the page and select 'inspect'. View the HTML that has been generated by the `forEach` loop.

### Test your understanding

- How can you expand this example so that it also shows films from the 1990s
  - You will need to add a new array for films from the 1990s, just add a couple of films.
  - You will need to add a new button to the HTML page that the user can click on to display the films.
- It would be nice if the year of the film was displayed next to the title of the film e.g. _Winter's Bone (2010)_.
  - How can you modify the code in `updateFilmList()` to do this.

## Externalising the data and using the Fetch API

- First comment out the arrays at the top of _app.js_. We aren't going to need these anymore.
- Have a look in the data folder in VS Code.

  - Note that it contains a number of JSON files.
  - Open one of these files, note the structure of the JSON data.
    - See how the JSON data is slightly different to the plain JavaScripts arrays we have used so far.

- Add the following function in _app.js_
  - This function will load a JSON file.

```javascript
async function getFilms(decade) {
  const url = "./data/films/" + decade + ".json";
  try {
    const response = await fetch(url);
    const films = await response.json();
    console.log(films);
  } catch (error) {
    console.error(error.message);
  }
}
```

- Modify the `changeDecade()` function so that it calls `getFilms()` instead of `updateFilmList()`
  - Because we aren't having to switch between different arrays, we can also get rid of the `if` statement.

```javascript
function changeDecade(decade) {
  updateFilmsHeading(decade);
  getFilms(decade);
}
```

- Test the page in a browser.
- In a browser 'right-click' on the page, select 'inspect', and select the 'console' tab.
  - We can use the console to display messages for debugging.
  - In the `getFilms()` function find the line of code that outputs to the console:
    ```javascript
    console.log(films);
    ```
  - In the console, you should be able to view this array of films that has been loaded from a JSON file.
- Click on the buttons and see how the results change in the console (the 1990 button won't work).
- Still in the browser, use the network tab to see the requests being made for the JSON data.

Finally, instead of showing the results in the console, we want them to appear in the page

- In `getFilms()` change the line

```javascript
console.log(films);
```

To

```javascript
updateFilmList(films);
```

- Test this in a browser. The app should work as it did before, however, now the data is being loaded from the JSON files.

### Test your understanding

- Create another JSON file, for storing data about films from the 1990s.
- Check this works.

## Integrating with a Laravel Back-End

- We don't want to write our own JSON data, instead we'd like to get the data from a back-end i.e. a database.
- We'll use the basic film app that we crated back in Week 5.
  - If you don't have your own copy of this work you can get a copy from https://github.com/CHT2520/intro-to-laravel-code.

First we'll make some changes to the Laravel app, and then we'll integrate the JavaScript.

### Making Changes to the Laravel App

- Open _FilmController.php_
- Modify the `index()` method in the _FilmController_ to look like the following:
  - Obviously the model doesn't have a method called `byDecade()`, we'll add this next using a query scope.

```php
  function index()
  {
      $films = Film::byDecade(2000)->get();
      return view('films.index', ['films' => $films]);
  }
```

- Open the model and add the `scopeByDecade()` method.
  - This uses a 'query scope' that allows us to customise queries on a model
    - In this case it will run an SQL query that retrieves all the films that have a year value within the specified range.
    - You can read more about query scopes here: https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/eloquent#query-scopes

```php
namespace App\Models;

use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Builder;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

class Film extends Model
{
    public function scopeByDecade(Builder $query, int $year): void
    {
        $query
            ->where('year', '>=', $year)
            ->where('year', '<', ($year + 10));
    }
}
```

- Finally we need to modify the view
- Open the _index.blade.php_ view and change it to the following
  - it simply adds the hyperlinks for selecting the decade.

```html
<x-layout title="List the films">
  <x-layout title="List the films">
    <div class="main-content">
      <div id="decadeNavHolder">
        <a href="/films" onclick="changeDecade(2000)">2000</a>
        <a href="/films" onclick="changeDecade(2010)">2010</a>
      </div>
      <h1 id="filmsHeading">Films from the 2000s</h1>
      <div id="filmListHolder">
        @foreach ($films as $film)
        <p>
          <a href="/films/{{$film->id}}"> {{$film->title}} </a>
        </p>
        @endforeach
      </div>
    </div>
  </x-layout></x-layout
>
```

- Check this works, the homepage of the app should only show films from the 2000s.

## Integrating JavaScript

- In the _public_ folder add a new folder, call it _js_
- Copy your _app.js_ file and put it in this folder.
- Modify the URL used for the `fetch`. Change the URL so we call a Laravel route instead of a JSON file.
- To do this change

```javascript
const url = "./data/films/" + decade + ".json";
```

to

```javascript
const url = "json/films/" + decade;
```

- Next, we need to add a route for the this URI. In _web.php_ add the following route

```php
Route::get('/json/films/{decade}', [FilmController::class, 'listByDecade']);
```

- Add a `listByDecade()` method in FilmController.
  - Note this method doesn't return a view, it returns JSON data

```php
    function listByDecade($decade = 2000)
    {
        $films = Film::byDecade($decade)->get();
        return response()->json($films);
    }
```

- Test this in a browser i.e. enter the URL http://localhost/json/films/2010
  - You should see the returned JSON data
- Finally, add a link to app.js in index.blade.view
  - Add the following at the end of this file

```html
  <script src='{{asset('js/app.js')}}'></script>
```

## adding more features

really ugly with the hard coded year in index
dynamically generate the list of decades
what if no films
javascript is fairly ropey
routes and api controller
